New Indexes chapter (#770)
neo4j/docs-cypher: modules/ROOT/pages/indexes/indexes-for-full-text-search.adoc

:description: This page describes how to use full-text indexes, to enable full-text search.
= Full-text search indexes

A full-text index is used to index nodes and relationships by `STRING` properties.

> Unlike xref:indexes/indexes-for-search-performance.adoc#indexes-create-range-index[range] and xref:indexes/indexes-for-search-performance.adoc#indexes-create-text-index[text] indexes, which can only perform limited `STRING` matching (exact, prefix, substring, or suffix matches), full-text indexes index individual words in any given `STRING` property.

Reviewer: > full-text indexes index individual

Can we find another verb, rather than `index`? It's a bit heavy.

Author: Agreed. will use "store" for now.

Full-text indexes are powered by the link:https://lucene.apache.org/[Apache Lucene] indexing and search library.

[[example-graph]]
== Example graph

The following graph is used for the examples below:

image::full_text_graph.svg[width="700",role="middle"]

To recreate it, run the following query against an empty Neo4j database:

[source, cypher, role=test-setup]
----
CREATE (nilsE:Employee {name: "Nils-Erik Karlsson", position: "Engineer", team: "Kernel", peerReviews: ['Nils-Erik is difficult to work with.', 'Nils-Erik is often late for work.']}),
(lisa:Manager {name: "Lisa Danielsson", position: "Engineering manager"}),
(nils:Employee {name: "Nils Johansson", position: "Engineer", team: "Operations"}),
(maya:Employee {name: "Maya Tanaka", position: "Senior Engineer", team:"Operations"}),
(lisa)-[:REVIEWED {message: "Nils-Erik is reportedly difficult to work with."}]->(nilsE),
(maya)-[:EMAILED {message: "I have booked a team meeting tomorrow."}]->(nils)
----

[[create-full-text-indexes]]
== Create full-text indexes

Full-text indexes are created with the `CREATE FULLTEXT INDEX` command.

> An index can be given a unique name when created, which is used to reference the specific index when querying or dropping it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An index can be given a unique name when created, which is used to reference the index when querying or dropping it.
```

If no name is given when created, a random name will be assigned to the full-text index.

> A full-text index applies to a list of labels or a list of relationship types, for node and relationship indexes respectively, and then a list of property names.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A full-text index applies to a list of labels/relationship types and a list of property names.
```
Although I would like more something like
> When creating a full-text index, you need to specify the labels/relationship types and property names it should apply to.

> Creating a full-text index requires the link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/operations-manual/{page-version}/authentication-authorization/database-administration/#access-control-database-administration-index[`CREATE INDEX` privilege].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[TIP]
Creating a full-text index requires the link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/operations-manual/{page-version}/authentication-authorization/database-administration/#access-control-database-administration-index[`CREATE INDEX` privilege].
```

It may be worth highlighting.

.Syntax for creating full-text indexes
[options="header", width="100%", cols="5a, 3"]
|===
| Command | Description

> | [source, syntax, role=noplay, indent=0]

Reviewer: Worth doing a search-and-replace-all for `, role=noplay, indent=0`, removing them.

----
CREATE FULLTEXT INDEX [index_name] [IF NOT EXISTS]
FOR (n:LabelName["\|" ...])
ON EACH "[" n.propertyName[, ...] "]"
[OPTIONS "{" option: value[, ...] "}"]

> ----

Reviewer: Just wanted to raise awareness about the fact that I think this syntax notation is only understandable by neo4j engineers. I appreciate we use some symbols, such as `[`, `]`, with two different meanings, but I don't think I would be able to make sense of this syntax were I not already familiar with it. This should raise the concern of whether it should have this form at all.

Author: Agreed - and I hope to undertake a project at some point to finally sort this out - but for now, I will leave it.

| Create a full-text index on nodes.

| [source, syntax, role=noplay, indent=0]
----
CREATE FULLTEXT INDEX [index_name] [IF NOT EXISTS]
FOR ()-"["r:TYPE_NAME["\|" ...]"]"-()
ON EACH "[" r.propertyName[, ...] "]"
[OPTIONS "{" option: value[, ...] "}"]
----
| Create a full-text index on relationships.

|===

> This query creates a full-text index named `namesAndTeams` on each `name` and `team` property for all `Employee` and `Manager` nodes in the graph:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This query creates a full-text index named `namesAndTeams` on each `name` and `team` property for nodes with label `Employee` or `Manager`:
```

.Create full-text index on node label and property combination
[source, cypher]
----
CREATE FULLTEXT INDEX namesAndTeams FOR (n:Employee|Manager) ON EACH [n.name, n.team]
----

This query highlights two key differences between full-text and xref:indexes/indexes-for-search-performance.adoc[search-performance indexes]:

* Full-text indexes can be applied to more than one node label.

> * Full-text indexes can be applied to more than one property, but unlike xref:indexes/indexes-for-search-performance.adoc#indexes-create-a-composite-range-index-for-nodes[composite search-performance indexes], a full-text index indexes entities that have _at least_ one of the indexed labels or relationship types, and _at least_ one of the indexed properties.

Reviewer: The sentence is broken. "Unlike ..., a full-text index ... [no verb]".

Author: yes there is "indexes" - which should be replace anyway.

> Similarly, though a relationship can only have one type, a full-text index can index multiple relationship types, and all relationships will be included that match one of the relationship types, and at least one of the indexed properties.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly, though a relationship can have only one type, a full-text index can index multiple relationship types. In that case, all types matching _at least one_ of the relationship types and _at least one_ of the indexed properties will be included.
```

Author: Isnt "at most one type" misleading, zero since it cannot have zero types?

Reviewer: Yes I'm sorry, I made a mistake there. Updated my suggestion.

> This query creates a full-text index named `communications` on each `message` property for all `REVIEWED` and `EMAILED` relationship types:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This query creates a full-text index named `communications` on the `message` property for relationship types `REVIEWED` and `EMAILED`:
```

.Create full-text index on relationship type and property combination
[source, cypher]
----
CREATE FULLTEXT INDEX communications FOR ()-[r:REVIEWED|EMAILED]-() ON EACH [r.message]
----

> Full-text indexes follow the same naming rules and best-practices as search performance indexes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Full-text indexes follow the same xref:indexes/index.adoc#naming-rules-and-recommendations[naming rules and best-practices] as search performance indexes.
```

> More information can be read in the section about xref:indexes/index.adoc#naming-rules-and-recommendations[Index naming rules].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

[[tokenization-analyzers]]
=== Tokenization and analyzers

> Full-text indexes index individual words in a `STRING` property.

Reviewer: Same with `indexes index`

> This is achieved by tokenizer, which breaks up a stream of characters (usually individual words) into individual tokens.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is achieved by a _tokenizer_, which breaks up a stream of characters into tokens (usually individual words).
```

> How a string is tokenized is determined by what analyzer the full-text index is configured with.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The way a string is tokenized is determined by what _analyzer_ the full-text index is configured with.
```

> The default analyzer (`standard-no-stop-words`) analyzes both the indexed values and query string.

Reviewer: What does it mean that it analyzes the query string? I assume all analyzers will work in the same way on the indexed fields _and_ on the query string, or?

> In some cases, however, using different analyzers for the indexed values and query string is more appropriate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, choosing an analyzer other than the default one may be more appropriate depending on the use case.
```

For example, if handling `STRING` values written in Swedish, it may be beneficial to select the _swedish_ analyzer, which knows how to tokenize Swedish words, and will avoid indexing Swedish stop words.

A complete list of all available analyzers is included in the result of the link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/operations-manual/{page-version}/reference/procedures/#procedure_db_index_fulltext_listavailableanalyzers[`db.index.fulltext.listAvailableAnalyzers`] procedure.

[[configuration-settings]]
=== Configuration settings

> The `CREATE FULLTEXT INDEX` command takes an `OPTIONS` clause, where the `indexConfig` can be specified.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `CREATE FULLTEXT INDEX` command takes an optional `OPTIONS` clause, where the `indexConfig` can be specified.
```

.Create full-text index using `OPTIONS`
[source, cypher]
----
CREATE FULLTEXT INDEX peerReviews FOR (n:Employee|Manager) ON EACH [n.peerReviews] // <1>
OPTIONS { 
  indexConfig: { // <2>
    `fulltext.analyzer`: 'english', // <3>
    `fulltext.eventually_consistent`: true // <4>
  }
}
----

> <1>  Creates a `peerReviews` full-text index on each `peerReviews` property for all `Employee` and `Manager` nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<1>  Creates a `peerReviews` full-text index on the `peerReviews` property for nodes with label `Employee` or `Manager`.
```

> <2>  The `indexConfig` is a map from `STRING` to `STRING` and `BOOLEAN` values, and can be used to set index-specific configuration settings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<2>  The `indexConfig` is a map to set index-specific configuration settings.
```

Although I question whether there's value in this remark at all. It is evident by its structure already.

Author: Yeah, probably redundant. Will remove.

<3> The `fulltext.analyzer` setting can be used to configure an index-specific analyzer.
In this case, it is set to the `english` analyzer.
The possible values for the `fulltext.analyzer` setting can be listed with the `db.index.fulltext.listAvailableAnalyzers` procedure.
<4>  The `fulltext.eventually_consistent` setting, if set to `true`, will put the index in an _eventually consistent_ update mode.

> This means that updates will be applied in a background thread "as soon as possible", instead of during a transaction commit, which is true for other indexes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that updates will be applied "as soon as possible", instead of during a transaction commit as it instead happens for other index types.
```

> For more information on how to configure full-text indexes, refer to the link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/operations-manual/{page-version}/performance/index-configuration#index-configuration-fulltext[Operations Manual -> Indexes to support full-text search].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information on how to configure full-text indexes, see link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/operations-manual/{page-version}/performance/index-configuration#index-configuration-fulltext[Operations Manual -> Indexes to support full-text search].
```

[[query-full-text-indexes]]
== Query full-text indexes

> To query a full-text index, use either the link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/operations-manual/{page-version}/reference/procedures/#procedure_db_index_fulltext_querynodes[`db.index.fulltext.queryNodes`] or the link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/operations-manual/{page-version}/reference/procedures/#procedure_db_index_fulltext_relationships[`db.index.fulltext.queryRelationships`] procedures.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To query a full-text index, use either the link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/operations-manual/{page-version}/reference/procedures/#procedure_db_index_fulltext_querynodes[`db.index.fulltext.queryNodes`] or the link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/operations-manual/{page-version}/reference/procedures/#procedure_db_index_fulltext_relationships[`db.index.fulltext.queryRelationships`] procedure.
```

[NOTE]
====
Unlike other xref:indexes/indexes-for-search-performance.adoc[search-performance indexes], full-text indexes are not automatically used by the xref:planning-and-tuning/execution-plans.adoc[Cypher query planner].
To access full-text indexes, they must be explicitly called with the above mentioned procedures.
====

> This query uses the `db.index.fulltext.queryNodes` to query the previously created full-text index for any `name` and `team` properties in the graph containing "nils":

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This query uses the `db.index.fulltext.queryNodes` to look for `nils` in the previously created full-text index `namesAndTeams`:
```

.Query a full-text index for a node property
[source, cypher]
----
CALL db.index.fulltext.queryNodes("namesAndTeams", "nils") YIELD node, score
RETURN node.name, score
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| node.name | score

> | "Nils Johansson" | 0.3300700783729553

Reviewer: It is slightly surprising that the index is case insensitive, and something relevant to remark somewhere.

| "Nils-Erik Karlsson" | 0.27725890278816223

2+d|Rows: 2

|===

> The `score` column represents how well the index thinks that the entry matches the given query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `score` column represents how well the index thinks that the entry matches the query string.
```
`query` is a whole cypher query, `query string` refers to the request string we send to the index.

> Thus, in addition to any exact matches, full-text indexes return _approximate_ matches to a given query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thus, in addition to any exact matches, full-text indexes return _approximate_ matches to a given query string.
```

> This is possible because both the property values that are indexed, and the queries to the index, are processed through the analyzer such that the index can find data entities which do not exactly match the provided `STRING`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
I don't think this adds any value.

The `score` results are always returned in _descending score order_, where the best matching result entry is put first.

This query uses the `db.index.fulltext.queryRelationships` to query the previously created `communications` full-text index for any `message` containing "meeting":

.Query a full-text index for a relationship property
[source, cypher]
----
CALL db.index.fulltext.queryRelationships("communications", "meeting") YIELD relationship, score
RETURN type(relationship), relationship.message, score
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="3*<m"]
|===
| type(relationship) | relationship.message | score

| "EMAILED" | "I have booked a team meeting tomorrow." | 0.3239005506038666

3+d|Rows: 1

|===

> To only obtain exact matches, quote the `STRING` you are searching for:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To only obtain exact matches, quote the string you are searching for:
```
We're not so concerned that it's a STRING as cypher type. It's just a generic string in computer science talk.

.Query a full-text index for exact matches
[source, cypher]
----
CALL db.index.fulltext.queryNodes("namesAndTeams", '"Nils-Erik"') YIELD node, score
RETURN node.name, score
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| node.name | score
| "Nils-Erik Karlsson" | 0.7588480710983276
2+d|Rows: 1
|===

> Lucene also allows the use of logical operators, such as `AND` and `OR`, to search for terms:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Query strings also support the use of link:https://lucene.apache.org/core/2_9_4/queryparsersyntax.html#Boolean%20operators[boolean operators] (`AND`, `OR`, `NOT`, `+`, `-`):
```
Is my list exhaustive?

Author: I think you missed `XOR`?

Reviewer: We need to check the Lucene docs. XOR on strings would be quite odd though.

Author: Lucene (https://lucene.apache.org/core/2_9_4/queryparsersyntax.html#Boolean%20operators) lists the following:
AND, OR, NOT, +, and -

Reviewer: Great, updated my suggestion.

.Query a full-text index using logical operators
[source, cypher]
----
CALL db.index.fulltext.queryNodes("namesAndTeams", 'nils AND kernel') YIELD node, score
RETURN node.name, node.team, score
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="3*<m"]
|===

| node.name | node.team | score
| "Nils-Erik Karlsson" | "Kernel" | 0.723090410232544
3+d|Rows: 1

|===

> It is possible to limit the search to specific properties, by putting the property name and a colon in front of the text being searched for.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is possible to limit the search to specific properties, by prefixing `<propertyName>:` to the query string.
```

.Query a full-text index for specific properties

> [source, cypher, indent=0]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source, cypher]
```

----
CALL db.index.fulltext.queryNodes("namesAndTeams", 'team:"Operations"') YIELD node, score
RETURN node.name, node.team, score
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="3*<m"]
|===

| node.name | node.team | score
| "Nils Johansson" | "Operations" | 0.21363800764083862
| "Maya Tanaka"   | "Operations" | 0.21363800764083862
3+d|Rows: 2

|===

A complete description of the Lucene query syntax can be found in the link:https://lucene.apache.org/core/8_2_0/queryparser/org/apache/lucene/queryparser/classic/package-summary.html#package.description[Lucene documentation].

[[text-array-properties]]

> === Text array properties

Reviewer: We should refer to "text arrays" as "list of strings", both because `list` is the proper term for the cypher type (and there is a difference in computer science between arrays and lists), and because a "text array" is not a standard term that rings a bell.

> If the indexed property contains a text array, each element of this array is analyzed independently and all produced terms are associated with the same property name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the indexed property contains a text array, each entry is analyzed independently and all produced tokens are associated to the same property name.
```

> This means that when querying such an indexed node or relationship, there is a match if any of the array elements match the query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that in the presence of such entities, the index returns the relevant nodes/relationships if any of the array entries matches the query string.
```

> For scoring purposes, the full-text index treats it as a single-property value, and the score will represent how close the query is to matching the entire array.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For scoring purposes, the full-text index treats lists as flattened strings, and the score represents how close the query string is with respect to the entire list.
```

Author: and here, too, arrays should be lists, right?

Reviewer: yes

> For example, the following query matches the same node while referring to different elements in the array:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
I find this remark confusing. Also, I would alter the example's query string, for example with `late` rather than `work`, as `work` appears in all array entries and one might think that is a requirement.

.Query a full-text index for properties present in a text array
[source, cypher]
----
CALL db.index.fulltext.queryNodes('peerReviews', 'work') YIELD node, score
RETURN node.name, node.reviews, score
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="3*<m"]
|===

| node.name | node.reviews| score
| "Nils-Erik Karlsson" | ["Nils-Erik is difficult to work with.", "Nils-Erik is often late for work."] | 0.17980130016803741

|===

[[show-full-text-indexes]]
== Show full-text indexes 

> To list all full-text indexes in a database, use the `SHOW ALL FULLTEXT INDEXES` command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To list all full-text indexes in a database, use the `SHOW FULLTEXT INDEXES` command:
```
I guess, judging from the example.

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
----

> For a full description of all return columns, see xref:indexes/indexes-for-search-performance.adoc#listing-indexes-result-columns[listing indexes: result columns].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a full description of all return columns, see xref:indexes/indexes-for-search-performance.adoc#listing-indexes-result-columns[Search performance indexes -- Listing indexes: result columns].
```

[[drop-full-text-indexes]]
== Drop full-text indexes

> A full-text node index is dropped by using the xref:indexes/indexes-for-search-performance.adoc#drop-an-index[same command as for other indexes], `DROP INDEX`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A full-text node index can be deleted with the `DROP INDEX` command, xref:indexes/indexes-for-search-performance.adoc#drop-an-index[as for other index types].
```

In the following example, the previously created `communications` full-text index is deleted from the database:

.Drop a full-text index
[source, cypher]
----
DROP INDEX communications
----

[[full--text-index-procedures]]
== List of full-text index procedures

> Full-text indexes are managed through commands and used through built-in procedures, see link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/operations-manual/{page-version}/reference/procedures[Operations Manual -> Procedures] for a complete reference.

Reviewer: If the reference below is complete for what regards full text indexes, we can as well avoid mentioning ops manual.

| List the available analyzers that the full-text indexes can be configured with.

| Use full-text node index.
| https://neo4j.com/docs/operations-manual/current/reference/procedures/#procedure_db_index_fulltext_querynodes[`db.index.fulltext.queryNodes`]
| Query the given full-text index. Returns the matching nodes and their Lucene query score, ordered by score.

| Use full-text relationship index.
| https://neo4j.com/docs/operations-manual/current/reference/procedures/#procedure_db_index_fulltext_queryrelationships[`db.index.fulltext.queryRelationships`]
| Query the given full-text index. Returns the matching relationships and their Lucene query score, ordered by score.

| Eventually consistent indexes.
| https://neo4j.com/docs/operations-manual/current/reference/procedures/#procedure_db_index_fulltext_awaiteventuallyconsistentindexrefresh[`db.index.fulltext.awaitEventuallyConsistentIndexRefresh`]
| Wait for the updates from recently committed transactions to be applied to any eventually-consistent full-text indexes.

|===

[[summary]]
== Summary

> The following is true for full-text indexes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
I find `Summary` telling enough.

* Full-text indexes support the indexing of both nodes and relationships.
* Full-text indexes include only property values of types `STRING` or `LIST<STRING>`.
* Full-text indexes are accessed via Cypher procedures.

> * Full-text indexes can return the _score_ for each result from a query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Full-text indexes return the _score_ for each result from a query.
```

* Full-text indexes support configuring custom analyzers, including analyzers that are not included with Lucene itself.
* Full-text indexes can be queried using the Lucene query language.
* Full-text indexes are kept up to date automatically, as nodes and relationships are added, removed, and modified.

> * Full-text indexes will automatically populate newly created indexes with the existing data in a store.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Newly created full-text indexes get automatically populated with the existing data in the database.
```

> * Full-text indexes can be checked by the consistency checker, and they can be rebuilt if there is a problem with them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Full-text indexes can be checked by the link:https://neo4j.com/docs/operations-manual/current/tools/neo4j-admin/consistency-checker/{consistency checker}, and they can be rebuilt if there is a problem with them.
```

> * Full-text indexes are a projection of the store, and can only index nodes and relationships by the contents of their properties.

Reviewer: What does this point mean, and what extra useful info does it try to convey?

Author: Nothing, I think - the same is true for all search-performance indexes. Let's get rid of it.

> * Full-text indexes can support any number of documents in a single index.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Full-text indexes can support any number of properties in a single index.
```
Or?

Author: Yeah

* Full-text indexes are created, dropped, and updated transactionally, and are automatically replicated throughout a cluster.
* Full-text indexes can be configured to be _eventually consistent_, in which index updating is moved from the commit path to a background thread.

> Using this feature, it is possible to work around the slow Lucene writes from the performance critical commit process, thus removing the main bottlenecks for Neo4j write performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using this feature, it is possible to work around the slow Lucene writes from the performance-critical commit process, thus removing the main bottlenecks for Neo4j write performance.
```
